Classifications of area of concerns
To further comprehend the nature of the identified barriers, the SMEs’ areas of concerns are classified into three groups—
resources, knowledge, and data management (as outlined in Table 1). Building on the research findings of Coleman
et al. (2016), the three classified groups will constitute several examples from other research studies to support and validate
these key barriers as identified.

Resources
In respect of grouping classification, the SMEs’ nucleus area of concern is mostly in relation to the subject of resources. This
is followed by knowledge and data management concerns. It can be deduced that the lack of an in-house data analytics specialist
is an implication caused by the insufficient number of available qualified data analytics talent. For instance, in the
United States, it is envisaged that by 2018, there will be a shortage of close to 190,000 skilled analytical talents and also a
shortfall of 1.5 million analysts and managers with the relevant competency to derive strategic decision(s) from big data analysis
(Manyika et al., 2011). A survey carried out among recruiters in the United Kingdom revealed that up to 57% of the
recruiters are facing obscurity in filling up the big data analytics gaps—this is inclusive of the large companies (UK e-skills,
2013). The scarcity of qualified data scientists would deter the analytics development scene in the European market (Probst
et al., 2014). Given the shortfall of talent supply, it is expected that the existing analytics software, readily available in the
market would aid in curbing the impending expertise gap. There are plenty of analytics solutions available in the market.
Nonetheless, to find a solution that is both user friendly and embedded with robust analytical capabilities is scarce. The need
for an instinctive user interface is critical in shortening the user learning curve (Probst et al., 2014)—allowing faster implementation
for the SMEs. As evaluation platforms may tend to be vendor biased; an end user with minimal or zero proficiency
in analytics may find it difficult to select a solution with a decent price–performance ratio. With an innumerable
number of studies highlighting that financial limitations are the SMEs’ major hindrance block (Bartlett & Bukvic, 2001;
Fuller-Love, 2006), a lower price–performance ratio solution would be more desirable by the SMEs.

Knowledge
In the area of knowledge concerns, a survey conducted in the United Kingdom reveals that SMEs’ personnel has an exceptionally
low comprehension of the big data analytics domain (UK e-skills, 2013). A similar survey conducted in Germany
shared an identical result (Coleman et al., 2016). To a great extent, the SMEs are uncertain of their datasets potentiality, in
turn drawing hesitation on the need to invest in data science capabilities to reap the intended benefits as affirmed by the various
analytics connoisseur. In spite of the fact that there are guidelines available for the SMEs to make reference to, there is
still a lack of exemplary research case studies that propagate the successful implementation of analytics in the SME sphere
(Coleman et al., 2016). The existing big data use cases generated in the EU often do not correlate with the SMEs’ points of
interests (Wadhwa, 2014). More case studies are needed to possibly fill the knowledge gap and jumpstart the SMEs’ enthusiasm
to take more interest in the big data analytics domain.

Data management
Finally, yet importantly, data security, protection, and privacy are the SMEs’ key concerns in the area of data management.
Close to 50% of SMEs identified data security and protection as the key barrier to big data analytics—in a worldwide survey
of more than 82 SME companies (Coleman et al., 2016). In comparison to larger companies, SMEs lack the competency to
scale up their IT security level (Lacey & James, 2010). The use of obsolete and nonupdated database management system
raised a critical IT security gap for SMEs, consequently making SMEs less resilient against cyber-attacks and intrusions. The
processing and analysis of customer’s data by SMEs, on the other hand, has to abide by EU legality on data protection and
privacy. The lengthy EU data protection law (Rights EUAfF, 2017), mooted in 2012, creates an added constraint for SMEs.
Predominantly, in view of the lack of financial resources, SMEs could not meet the expenses to engage a legal expert in
order to fully grasp the EU’s data protection legislation requirements.